Introducing built-in mutability entitlements (#86)
onflow/flips: cadence/2023-05-10-references-on-member-access.md

# Change Member Access Semantics

| Status        | Proposed                                     |
:-------------- |:---------------------------------------------|
| **FLIP #**    |                                              |
| **Author(s)** | Supun Setunga (supun.setunga@dapperlabs.com) |
| **Sponsor**   | Supun Setunga (supun.setunga@dapperlabs.com) |
| **Updated**   | 2023-05-10                                   |

## Objective

This proposal suggest to return a reference when accessing a member of a container (field of a composite value, 
key of a map, index of an array), if the accessed member is also a container type (i.e: non-primitive type).

## Motivation

> A previous version of cadence (secure cadence release) restricted the potential foot-gun of mutating container-typed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A previous version of Cadence ("Secure Cadence") restricted the potential foot-gun of mutating container-typed
```

`let` fields/variables via the

> [Cadence mutability restrictions FLIP](https://github.com/onflow/flips/blob/main/flips/20211129-cadence-mutability-restrictions.md).

Reviewer: Maybe add two point out that this solution was only a partial solution and only covered arrays and dictionaries, built-in types, and was not a general solution for user-defined types.

However, there are still ways to mutate such fields by:
- Directly mutating a nested composite typed field.
- Mutating the field via a reference.

More details on this problem is described in the [FLIP for improving mutability restrictions](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/58).

This proposal is aimed at solving this problem by returning references for member-access, and using 
[Entitlements](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/54) to control who can perform mutating operations via the reference.

## User Benefit

> Suggested changes of this proposal eliminate the potential of users accidentally exposing mutable fields,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The suggested changes of this proposal eliminate the potential for users to accidentally expose mutable fields,
```

thinking they are constants.

> 

Reviewer: Another benefit of this proposal is that it would allow replacing [FLIP 703: Cadence Mutability Restrictions](https://github.com/onflow/flips/blob/main/flips/20211129-cadence-mutability-restrictions.md), the special casing for built-in types (arrays and dictionaries) could be generalized to user-defined types, by introducing entitlements for built-in types (e.g. `Mutable` entitlement; but as mentioned below, maybe better in a separate FLIP)

Author: I don't think we can completely replace [FLIP 703](https://github.com/onflow/flips/blob/main/flips/20211129-cadence-mutability-restrictions.md), since the changes added there apply to 'owned' values, where the entitlement-based solution (this proposal) only applicable for references.

Reviewer: Oh interesting, I didn't realize / forgot it also applied to owned values.

Maybe we can make this FLIP propose to explicitly undo the changes that were introduced in FLIP 703?

Author: Added 19f16dc4ff18f3fe098c940af2e4089d2d408b68

## Design Proposal

Before going into the details of the proposal, it is important to note that these proposed changes depend on
[Entitlements](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/54).

This proposal consist of two main changes:
 - Member-access to return references.

>  - Introducing a built-in `Mutable` entitlement.

Reviewer 2: By introducing this built-in entitlement, are setting a precedent that entitlements should be defined in title case (like types), and that they should be in adjective form ("Mutable"). I don't have problem with either of these choices, but I just wanted to draw attention to the fact that these decisions are being made here (whether we mean to or not!), and we might as well make them intentionally. If anyone has suggestions for the best way to style the names of entitlements otherwise, now is the best time to debate them!

Some ideas (I don't endorse any of these, just brainstorming):
- maybe entitlements are lower case like functions? `mutable`
- maybe they start with a special character (like underscore) `_mutable`
- verb form? `Mutating`
- noun form? `Mutator`
- adverb? `Mutably`

Reviewer 2: On language forms, some other examples are worth thinking through:

| Entitlement | Noun | Verb | Adjective | Adverb |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Modifying a Collection | Mutator | Mutating | Mutable | Mutably |
| Vault Withdrawing | Provider | Providing | Providable | Providably |
| Kitty Renaming | Namer | Naming | Namable | Namably |
| Kitty Breeding | Breeder | Breeding | Breedable | Breedably |
| NFT Minting | Minter | Minting | Mintable | Mintably |

Going through these examples, I think that the noun and verb forms are the cleanest. (The adverb form has to be seen as a joke at this point!) I kind of like the noun form since that does differentiate it from functions, but could mean it's conflated with resource and struct types ("objects"). Without looking at the examples, the adjective form makes the most sense (it's a modifier of the reference).

Author: Great point! I don't think we ever had a conversation about the convention so far.

In terms of styling, I personally think people will "use" entitlements more frequently than they define them. So in my view, treating them as similar to access-controllers makes more sense, and hence should make them look a lot like access controllers.
i.e: a lower-case naming. e.g: `access(all)`, `access(self)` and similarly `access(mutable)`

For the language form (maybe I'm not the best person to argue about this, not my first language :) ), In this particular case, I felt it's natural to call a "mutable reference" for it implies the value is mutable via the reference.
But I agree, considering the other examples, noun sounds more suitable.

If we go with noun-form, one reason why we should maybe go for a lower-case naming is to avoid any confusion with naming: for e.g: Now there is a `Provider` interface, and we would need an entitlement to expose provider functionality, and having that also named `Provider` would be really confusing.

Reviewer 3: On the other hand, lower case in Cadence (and most other languages) are typically used for values, which entitlements are not. IMO they behave more like types and should be cased accordingly; this way its clear to users they can't use them like values. 

As for the part of speech, I like the adjectives. Nouns clearly denote objects and other values, while verbs denote functions. Entitlements "describe" the object that you have (in this case a reference) and the interactions that you can perform on that reference, so it seems to me like adjectives would be easiest to talk about; a `Mutable` reference to a `Vault` or a `Breedable` reference to a `Kitty` cleanly describe exactly what you are allowed to do with that reference.

Reviewer 2: Well, aren't we just having a fine ol' bikeshedding moment... 😆 

Let me put my vote in for "noun" and "lowercase". (Sadly, I'm not joking.)

Why noun? Because it describes who you want to have the entitlement. We use nouns for the built-in "entitlements" `access(all)` and `access(self)`, so why not `access(mutator)`, `access(withdrawer)`, and `access(breeder)`?

In fact, I would argue that now that interfaces are all about polymorphism, the interfaces that should change to verb form. `Withdrawing` interface. `Depositing` interface. `Breeding` interface.

Why lower case? Because they _aren't_ types, and we don't have a third letter case. 😅 (Yeah, that's weak!) If you squint, I'd say they feel like values, not types or variables. That implies they are closest to enumerations. Unfortunately, Java, Python, and C seem encourage all-upper, Go and Rust like title case, while Swift and Pascal prefer all-lower for enums... 😈

Reviewer: It is probably bike shedding, but still leaving my 2 cents here: 

A naming scheme for entitlements based on nouns, and especially one which describes roles, seems counter to the capability-based security scheme we are trying to encourage: it looks like access is granted to a role, rather than a granted capability. For example, `withdrawer` looks like access is granted to someone who is a withdrawer, but really it should be to something which has the capability to withdraw, i.e. the reference. I feel like verbs work better, but can live with nouns.

For naming in general, and e.g. for interfaces, we've been following [Swift's API design guidelines](https://www.swift.org/documentation/api-design-guidelines/). Its naming suggestions for protocols:

> - Protocols that describe what something is should read as nouns (e.g. Collection).
> - Protocols that describe a capability should be named using the suffixes able, ible, or ing (e.g. Equatable, ProgressReporting).

Reviewer 4: I agree with @turbolent that using a noun might be confusing: `access(owner)`

Reviewer 5: I prefer lowercase and verbs, but dont have an issue with nouns. Allthough the crash with things like owner might be an issue.

Btw are owner/account/contract going to be entitlements now, or just like they are now?

Reviewer 3: `account` and `contract` are not entitlements, they are special cased like `all` and `self` that mean specific things when used as `access` modifiers. There is no built in `access(owner)`.

Reviewer: @onflow/flow-smart-contracts what do you think about this?

Reviewer 2: > Protocols that describe a capability should be named using the suffixes able, ible, or ing (e.g. Equatable, ProgressReporting).

This feels like as decent a tie-breaker as anything else! However, they do lump together verbs and adjectives. Should it be "mutating" or "mutable"?

Let me suggest "mutating". Think about using it in a sentence:

"I can modify this object because I have a _mutating reference_."

"I can modify this object because I have a _mutable reference_."

We are _used_ to the second structure, but if you actually think about what the words mean, "mutable reference" means "a reference that can be mutated", which isn't what we have at all. The reference itself is not being mutated! A "mutating reference" means "a reference that mutates". Which is exactly right. (I'll admit that "a reference that mutates" is somewhat ambiguous since it could mean "a reference for mutating" or "a reference that gets mutated", but at least _one_ of those meanings is correct! 😉 )

I think Bastian should flip a coin to decide between Title Case and lowercase. 😈

Reviewer 6: Looks like consensus is converging, but I'll add my $.02 in for Swift convention + capitalization.

Adjective/verb makes the most sense to my ears in relation to the reference in question. And capitalization creates distinction from values & types, further distinguished by noun special access modifiers - e.g. self, all, account, contract. 

```cadence
access(MUTATABLE) fun updateName(name: String)
// compared to...
access(Mutatable) fun updateName(name: String)
// and finally
access(mutatable) fun updateName(name: String)
```

That said, lowercase definitely reads better, so I could live with that as well.

Reviewer 3: You don't mention Title Case in your comment, does that mean it's your least preferred option?

Reviewer 6: Yes, title case would be least preferred out of the three IMO

Reviewer: Sorry if there was some confusion: The reference to the Swift style guide was in response to Dete's note on naming interfaces, I didn't mean to suggest this for entitlements.

For the verb form, I don't quite get why only the `-ing` form is mentioned (e.g. mutating), and I find the infinite form (e.g. mutate) simpler, For example, a `auth(Mutate) &r` authorizes me to mutate `r`.

When working through the [Account type FLIP](https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/92), which introduces many fine-grained and coarse-grained entitlements, it felt very natural to use:
- nouns for coarse-grained entitlements, they describe what is granted access to
- verbs for fine-grained entitlements, they describe what operation can be performed

For example, the fine-grained `AddKey` entitlement is added for allowing to add a key,
and the coarse-grained `Keys` entitlement is added to allow any key management operation.

The casing does not matter to me much, but like @dsainati1 pointed out, it might make sense to distinguish them from built-in non-entitlement access modifiers (`all`, `self`, etc.).
I'd prefer title-case over capitalization – that looks like SCREAMING and is a bit too much "in your face", haha.

Reviewer 3: I don't really feel strongly about the part of speech to be honest; I'd even be fine simply not adding any explicit guidelines here and encouraging developers to use whatever names they want for entitlements. 

However, I do feel very strongly that lowercase is not acceptable for entitlement names because as Bastian mentioned it looks too similar to the built-in access modifiers `all`, `self`, `account` and `contract`, which are explicitly NOT entitlements and cannot be used in conjunction with entitlements. I don't want to confuse anyone into thinking they can use `contract` in an `auth` modifier or in the output of a mapping, so best not even to invite the comparison and just case entitlement names differently than these builtins.

Reviewer: Maybe we can simplify the naming further and just use "operation nouns" for fine-grained entitlements.
Basically, the fine-grained entitlement is named  "what operation" can be performed.
For example, `Insertion` instead of `Insert`, and `KeyAddition` instead of `AddKey`.

Reviewer: @SupunS @dsainati1 Thoughts?

Author: Good point on the verb forms, Bastian. I actually like the 'root form' of the verb more.

Just went through the account type change FLIP and the entitlements that are proposed there. The following (what you previously suggested) actually makes a lot of sense.

> - nouns for coarse-grained entitlements, they describe what is granted access to
> - verbs for fine-grained entitlements, they describe what operation can be performed

Again, we are only proposing a 'guideline', and a single language form does not always fit all the use-case. So for simplicity, I would vote in for the 'root form' of verbs, and nouns, and propose the above two bullet points as the recommendation. Then leave it up to the developers to choose one as appropriate.

Author: Updated to the root form: 778d2d5a7ec79932016a571642621df6651fd5e5

### Member-Access To Return References

> The main change proposed in this FLIP is that, field-access (i.e: `foo.bar`) and index-access (`foo[bar]`) would now

Reviewer: It might be good to be more specific about the behaviour, i.e. clarify that member access change depends on two things:
  - What the type of the accessed value (base) is (e.g. composite, dictionary, array, optional), and
  - What the type of the element is (e.g. primitive (what exactly?) vs non-primitive (composite, 
dictionary, array, optional?))

Author: Included in the other proposal: https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89

return a reference to targeting value, instead of the value itself, if the value non-primitive type.

e.g: Consider the below `Collection` resource which has two fields: one is primitive, and the other is non-primitive.

```cadence
pub resource Collection {

    // Primitive-typed field
    pub var id: String

    // Dictionary (non-primtive) typed field
    pub var ownedNFTs: @{UInt64: NonFungibleToken.NFT}
}
```

Assuming `collection` is of type `Collection`:

```cadence
// `collection.ownedNFTs` would return a reference of type `&{UInt64: NonFungibleToken.NFT}`
var ownedNFTsRef: &{UInt64: NonFungibleToken.NFT} = collection.ownedNFTs

// However, `collection.id` would resturn the value (same as existing semantics),
// since it is a prmitive type.
var id: String = collection.id
```

It is also important to note that, the returned reference has no entitlements assigned to them.
i.e: they are **non-**`auth` references.

> 

Reviewer: It might be good to emphasize that this proposal only applies to access on _references_, and no changes are proposed to access on owned values.

> ### Built-in `Mutable` Entitlement

Reviewer: It might be better to propose this addition in a separate FLIP, and focus on just the change to member access semantics in this FLIP.

Such a follow-up FLIP could then propose to _replace_ the existing feature, [FLIP 703: Cadence Mutability Restrictions](https://github.com/onflow/flips/blob/main/flips/20211129-cadence-mutability-restrictions.md), by replacing the notion of "mutability" for functions with entitlements for them.

Author: Open a separate pr https://github.com/onflow/flips/pull/89 to propose the member-access semantics change, and re-purpose this PR to propose the introduction of built-in entitlements.

It is not mutable since it has no entitlements.

```cadence 
var len = ownedNFTsRef.length         // OK: read only operation

ownedNFTsRef["someNFT"] <- someNft    // Static Error: `append` needs `Mutable` entitlement
```

#### Making the Field Mutable

Assume the author wanted to make `ownedNFTs` field mutable for some reason.
Given that field-access now always returns a non-auth reference, now the author needs to introduce a function
to return an authorized reference.

```cadence
pub resource Collection: NonFungibleToken.Collection {

    pub var ownedNFTs: @{UInt64: NonFungibleToken.NFT}

    // Provide a function that returns a mutable reference.
    pub fun getMutableNFTs() auth(Mutable) &{UInt64: NonFungibleToken.NFT} {
        return &self.ownedNFTs as auth(Mutable) &{UInt64: NonFungibleToken.NFT}
    }
}
```

Now the mutable operation is possible via the `auth(Mutable)` reference,

```cadence
// Get a mutable reference
var ownedNFTsRef = collectionRef.getMutableNFTs()

// `ownedNFTsRef` is a dictionary reference with auth{Mutable} entitlement.

var len = ownedNFTsRef.length        // OK

ownedNFTsRef["someNFT"] <- someNft   // OK
```

### Drawbacks

> #### Mutating functions without `Mutable` entitlements.

Reviewer: As discussed, it might be good to point out that inner mutations are not always bad, e.g. by discussing the Vault example, where deposits mutations are "safe", but with withdrawals are "unsafe".

Compared to previous proposals which were concerned with "physical mutation" (failing to find a good term for this concept), i.e. the plain fact if some value is mutated, e.g. by introducing a "mutating" modifier (cf. Swift), this proposal actually addresses the shortcoming of those proposals: Such a notion is probably too limiting, as typically,  programs actually have a notion of "logical mutation" (same here, making up this term for a lack of better words) as demonstrated by the Vault example. As a developer, I want to decide what access is granted to mutating functions.

Author: This is added in the updated proposal
